# Climate Claims Assignment - Does Climate Change have a Significant Impact on Diet Diversity? - Jonathan Lai (400183044)

# Evaluating whether Climate Change has a Significant Impact on Diet Diversity in Children Around the World

Eric Worrall argues that a recent scientific paper published by Niles et al. (2021) is flawed because it does not put more emphasis on its most significant result, wealth. He highlights an online newspaper article written by Sonia Elks, who spends most of the space describing the detrimental impact of climate change on children’s diet diversity (Elks, 2021). He specifically points out that she states household wealth as the biggest single predictor of diet variety, a point mirrored in the published research article which is not described in significant detail (Worrall, 2021). Worrall is critical that little emphasis is placed on poverty, even though poverty was not the purpose of the scientific study. He concludes his opinion piece by stating that Africa should mirror the actions of China by coal guzzling to alleviate itself from poverty (Worrall, 2021). This article is of particular interest due to his reasoning in questioning the normal scientific method procedure. In essence, although Worrall brings up a great point in stating the socioeconomic conditions that limit the quality of life for certain individuals in poorer areas, the research aimed to primarily investigate the potential impacts of climate change. It is also important to outline and bring awareness to issues such as malnutrition since this is a growing concern in many areas of the world. Since climate change appears to add to this problem, it is integral for this research to be published as a way of communicating the imminent message to aid vulnerable groups quickly. 

Despite the opinion stated by Eric Worrall, the detrimental influence of climate change certainly has an impact on diet diversity in children. Firstly, he cited a peer-reviewed journal article within the Environmental Research Letters, a credible source for environmental science papers. Meredith Niles and Molly Brown, the principal investigators for this study, are also both credible researchers listed on the orcid.org website (Niles et al., 2021). The purpose of their scientific journal is to investigate the relationship of climate change and diet diversity across children in nineteen countries (Niles et al., 2021). Although they do state that wealth is the biggest predictor of reduced diet diversity as mentioned in the newspaper article, it is not the main point of article. Rather, they acknowledge the socioeconomic limitations associated with their study and use wealth as one example of a comparative factor to the other variables selected. Niles et al. (2021) also do a thorough job within the study to ensure that their results are transparent, reproducible, and easy to follow. Their methodology is concisely and clearly explained. They analyze and discuss case studies alongside regional and international models to prove the effect of climate change on diet diversity, further validating their data results. 

Furthermore, many other studies support and provided basis for the research conducted by Niles et al. (2021). For example, one study provided the basis for research for stating that climate change will be most pronounced in areas in the global South, where the areas are hot and dry (Fanzo et al., 2018). Another source confirms that climate change directly affects food production systems, alongside the socioeconomic forces which can be evaluated separately (Myers et al., 2017). In addition, one scientific journal has made it clear that not enough efforts are being taken to reverse the effects of climate change on undernutrition (Phalkey et al., 2015). Thus, although Worrall’s point is correct that wealth may be the biggest determining factor, climate change can certainly be studied as a variable separate from socioeconomic status. The vast amount of literature present against Worrall’s point prove that climate change plays a significant role in the diet diversity of children.  

# *References*

- Elks, S., 2021. Scientists warn climate change is harming children’s diets. Japan Today. [online] 19 Jan. Available at: <https://japantoday.com/category/features/health/scientists-warn-climate-change-is-harming-children's-diets> [Accessed 1 Feb. 2021].
- Fanzo, J., Davis, C., McLaren, R. and Choufani, J., 2018. The effect of climate change across food systems: Implications for nutrition outcomes. Global Food Security, 18, pp.12–19.
- Myers, S.S., Smith, M.R., Guth, S., Golden, C.D., Vaitla, B., Mueller, N.D., Dangour, A.D. and Huybers, P., 2017. Climate Change and Global Food Systems: Potential Impacts on Food Security and Undernutrition. Annual Review of Public Health, 38(1), pp.259–277.
- Niles, M.T., Emery, B.F., Wiltshire, S., Brown, M.E., Fisher, B. and Ricketts, T.H., 2021. Climate impacts associated with reduced diet diversity in children across nineteen countries. Environmental Research Letters, 16(1), p.015010.
- Phalkey, R.K., Aranda-Jan, C., Marx, S., Höfle, B. and Sauerborn, R., 2015. Systematic review of current efforts to quantify the impacts of climate change on undernutrition. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of America, 112(33), pp.E4522-4529.
- Worrall, E., 2021. Study: Global Warming will Impact Children’s Nutrition. Watts Up With That?. [online] 20 Jan. Available at: <https://wattsupwiththat.com/2021/01/20/study-global-warming-will-impact-childrens-nutrition/> [Accessed 1 Feb. 2021].

